
Lab #1
The Scientific Method

Sean Michael Ronan
Department of Biology, Chemistry, and Environmental Studies, Molloy College
BIO 1260 – A1 - Biology
Dr. Noelle Cutter
September 17, 2021


Current Event Article: http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/03/120321094129.htm

Breast density refers to the amount of tissue -- specifically fibrous and glandular tissue – located in females’s breasts and is an important factor which can determine the risk of developing breast cancer. A study performed by the Karolina Institutet examined mammograms on premenopausal and postmenopausal females who have had breast cancer once in their lifetime to develop their risk of developing cancer again based on percentage density calculations.
The study hypothesized that females who have had breast cancer and are postmenopausal, or over 50 years old, have a higher risk of developing cancer again if their breasts have denser tissue. The independent variables used were the ages of the postmenopausal females. The study included females who were anywhere from 50 to 74 years old and were once inflicted with cancer in the past. The dependent variable used was breast density. The controlled variable is the group of premenopausal Swedish females who were once diagnosed with breast cancer between 1993 and 1995.
The Karolinska Institutet tested its hypothesis by performing mammograms on and calculating the percentage densities of both the postmenopausal and premenopausal groups of females. The postmenopausal group included 1,774 females. 
Dr. Eriksson and her colleagues found that females with a high percentage density had breasts that were greater than 75% in tissue density. Researchers concluded that the average density among the patients was 18%. Additionally, scientists found that patients with an initial diagnosis of 25% or more percentage density during their first occurrence of cancer had a higher risk of developing cancer again. The research found that percentage density decreases 2% each year before a woman undergoes menopause; post-menopause, scientists have seen a decrease by nearly 10%. Finally, the Karolinska Institutet deduced that the interaction between the stroma and epithelial cells leads to an increased risk of cancer in the breasts. Further, scientists predicted that dense breasts create an environment that allows for the transformation from epithelial cells to cancer cells.
It is important for females to undergo routine mammograms, especially postmenopausal females and those once inflicted with cancer, to estimate one’s own breast tissue density and calculate their risk of breast cancer reoccurrence. Research suggests that females who are aged 50-74 and once had cancer have a higher risk of developing cancer again if their percentage densities remain high, so it is crucial to periodically monitor breast tissue density in patients.
Additionally, it is vital for doctors to observe the interactions between the stroma and epithelial cells.
